## Current Issues

Elephant populations in the Central African Republic (CAR) occur in the savannas of the north and in forest areas, particularly in the southwest. Elephants, along with many other wildlife species, have almost disappeared from the north of the country, despite a very low human population. The main reasons are thought to be the increase in cattle transhumance, civil disorder, the increase in weapons and commercial poachers from other countries. Protected areas have been ineffective, since elephant densities were lower there than in nearby hunting areas (Bouché et al., 2010).

Conservation efforts have been hampered by a lack of stability. The country was plunged into turmoil in 2013 when the Seleka rebel group seized power and was then countered by the Anti-Balakas. A transitional government took over in 2014 but violence continued despite the presence of peacekeeping forces.

The African Parks Network began working in Chinko in 2015 and was given a mandate to manage the area for 50 years by the Ministry of Forestry, the Environment and Tourism (Walley, 2014).

CAR published an elephant conservation action plan in 1992, although this is now out of date (Ministère des Eaux, des Forets, 1992).

## Numbers and Distribution

The estimated number of elephants in areas surveyed in the last ten years in Central African Republic is 702 ± 245 at the time of the last survey for each area. There may be an additional 699 to 826 elephants in areas not systematically surveyed. These guesses likely represent a minimum number, and actual numbers could be higher than those reported. Together, this estimate and guess apply to 21,812 km², which is 89% of the estimated known and possible elephant range. There remains an additional 11% of the estimated range for which no elephant population estimates are available.

There has been a reduction in both estimates and guesses since the AESR 2007, but the differences in the estimates from the main population in the southwestern forest block are not significant.

The northern savanna elephant population occurs in an area that includes the Bamingui-Bangoran National Park and Manovo Gounda-St. Floris National Park. A 2010 **aerial sample count** (Bouché et al., 2011) gave an estimate of 68 ± 113 elephants for the northern savanna landscape. This replaces an estimate of 929 ± 950 elephants from an aerial sample count of a smaller area in 2005 (Renaud et al., 2005). The carcass ratio was 30% in 2005 and 53% in 2010, indicating a very high level of poaching (Bouché, 2010).

There is very little recent information on the status of elephants in the Bangassou Forest in the southeast region of the country. The last estimate was of 500-1,000 elephants in 2004 (Blake, 2005) and a guess of 500 has been retained from the AESR 2007, although it is very unlikely that this number of elephants still survives in the area. During a reconnaissance survey in 2009, Luhunu and Bechem (Luhunu & Bechem, 2009) only found signs of elephants in an area to the west of Bangassou, which had not been surveyed in 2004, and none in Bangassou Forest itself. The range has been changed to **doubtful** with a point record in the western area.

In the AESR 2007, the area to the north of Bangassou Forest was classified as doubtful range. However, African Parks Network staff report that there are at least 50, and perhaps as many as 150 elephants (believed to be forest elephants) in the Chinko area, just over 30 kilometres to the north of Bangassou Forest (Aebischer, pers. comm., 2016) so this is recorded as a **new population** with a small amount of **known range**.

The Dzanga Sangha landscape in the extreme southwest is the only remaining elephant stronghold in the country, and is contiguous with the Nouabalé-Ndoki landscape in Congo. Elephants in Dzanga-Sangha are part of a single population that extends across the border with Congo into the Nouabalé-Ndoki National Park, as shown by satellite collaring of elephants in the area and by individual recognition of 68 individual elephants moving between the two countries (Blake et al., 2008). A **dung count** carried out in 2011-12 gave an estimate of 631 ± 218 individuals (Princée, 2013) (excluding Yobe-Lidjombe, which has been treated separately for comparative purposes). In the same year 1,150 individuals were individually identified in Dzanga Bai, suggesting that this may have been an underestimate (Princée, 2013). The 2011-12 estimate replaces one of 869 ± 214 from a 2003 to 2004 dung count (Blake, 2005) indicating that no significant change took place over this time. The 2011-12 guess for the reconnaissance survey of Yobe-Lidjombe was 152-179. This area was not covered in the 2003-2004 survey so is recorded as a **new population**. The widely reported killing of at least 26 elephants in May 2013 at Dzanga Bai postdates the 2011 survey, but the prompt response to this incident probably limited the impact on the overall population (Canby, 2015).

The south of N’gotto Classified Forest still held elephants in 2000 (Dethier & Ghiurghi, 2000), but in a 2002 survey by Hicks, no elephant dung was found in over 150 kilometres walked (Maisels, Strindberg et al., 2013b) indicating that elephants may have been eliminated in the area or were only seasonally present (Brugière et al., 2005). This has been changed to **possible range**. 