## Current Issues

Eastern Africa has been the region most affected by poaching, having experienced an approximately 50% decline in estimates from surveys since the AESR 2007, largely attributed to a greater than 60% decline in Tanzania’s elephant numbers, including heavy losses in some of the region’s formerly most significant populations.

The free flow of small arms in the region, providing a ready supply for poachers (Small Arms Survey, 2015), continues to be of concern. While major economic development has been underway in Ethiopia, Kenya, Rwanda, Uganda and Tanzania, political instability continues to cause problems for elephant conservation in South Sudan and Somalia. Extensive land transformation for agricultural expansion and exploration by extractive industries is taking place and elephant habitats are increasingly being fragmented, degraded and lost.

Eastern Africa has 16 MIKE sites. Mount Elgon National Park MIKE site in Uganda has not submitted any carcass data since the MIKE programme began in 2002. While reporting rates vary, the remaining 15 sites have submitted carcass data between 2007 and 2015. After a peak in 2011, 2015 was the fourth consecutive year in which the PIKE value declined in Eastern Africa. The PIKE value for Eastern Africa in 2015 is comparable to the levels recorded in the region in 2008 but is higher than the values for the five years prior to that (Figure 1, on the following page). (CITES Secretariat, 2016).

In recent analyses of seizure data prepared for CITES, Ethiopia, Kenya, Tanzania and Uganda were identified as countries with a worrying involvement in illegal ivory trade (CITES Secretariat, 2012; Milliken et al., 2013, 2016) and are currently part of the National Ivory Action Plan process. Further details are provided in the country summaries.

## Numbers and Distribution

The estimated number of elephants in areas surveyed in the last ten years in Eastern Africa is 86,373 ± 10,549 at the time of the last survey for each area. There may be an additional 11,973 to 12,060 elephants in areas not systematically surveyed. Together, this estimate and guess apply to 548,587 km², which is 62% of the estimated known and possible elephant range. There remains an additional 38% of range for which no elephant population estimates are available.

Between the AESR 2007 and this report, elephant numbers in Eastern Africa have declined by about 87,000, on the basis of updated estimates for sites where comparable survey techniques were employed. However, some populations have been surveyed for the first time and this has led to an increase of approximately 9,000 in the “new population” category.  The result is that the current total number of elephants from surveyed populations represents a smaller estimated reduction of almost 79,000 elephants, still close to a 50% loss, during the period from late 2006 to the end of 2015.

The proportion of elephant range for which elephant estimates are available currently stands at 62%, an increase from 38% in the previous report. In fact, the AESR 2016 shows an important, essentially reversed situation from the AESR 2007, which reported approximately 40% assessed and 60% unassessed range for Eastern Africa. Furthermore, the overall reliability of estimates has increased considerably, with estimates from systematic surveys now accounting for 53% of total range, versus 38% in the previous report. The overall quality of information, as measured by the IQI, has also increased from 0.36 to 0.49.

The large reported losses, primarily due to poaching in Tanzania, account for much of the continent’s overall decline since the AESR 2007. The Selous and Ruaha-Rungwa ecosystems suffered the heaviest losses. Other areas, such as the Moyowosi-Kigosi and Sagara-Nyamagoma ecosystem and Ugalla Game Reserve also suffered losses, primarily from 2009–2013. Although Tanzania remains an important range state with about 50,000 elephants, this has been a catastrophic time for elephants in that country, which is especially tragic following the strong recovery they experienced following the last poaching crisis in the 1970s and 1980s.

Despite worrying levels of poaching, and continued concerns over the trafficking of illegal ivory through the region, Kenya and Uganda’s overall populations have remained stable with indications of small but not significant increases in the latter. All estimates from Kenya’s forest populations were degraded due to age, though a new round of forest surveys have recently been initiated. Kenya’s elephant stronghold remains in the Tsavo National Park and its surrounding areas. The Laikipia-Samburu population lost some elephants to poaching but over the 10-year period there was a slight increase. There were concerning levels of poaching in Masai Mara and surrounding areas.

Both Ethiopia’s slight increases and South Sudan’s more substantial increases probably result from an improvement in knowledge rather than genuine increment in elephant numbers. Most of South Sudan’s elephant populations were surveyed for the first time in many years from 2007-2010. The resurgence of civil unrest in South Sudan has made it impossible to carry out surveys more recently. Rwanda’s elephant numbers remain stable at just over 100 elephants in two widely-separated populations. The fate of elephants in Eritrea and Somalia remains unknown.

No populations are recorded as having been lost in Eastern Africa.

There has been no net increase in range but improved information has led to an increase in the proportion of known range, which has increased from approximately 500,000 km² (57% of overall range) in the AESR 2007 to approximately 736,000 km² (about 85% of total range) in 2015. This is mostly the result of better information on range in South Sudan and Tanzania but also a real increase in range in the Laikipia-Samburu and Magadi areas in Kenya. 

