## Current Issues

Elephant populations in Ethiopia are mostly small and scattered, primarily occurring in the peripheral low-lying parts of the country, or in remnant forests. The formal establishment and gazettement of protected areas in Ethiopia took place in 2014. Delays in this process were in part due to the devolution of authority to a regional level. In many instances boundaries have not been demarcated and people continue to live in protected areas. There is little active management or patrolling of protected areas. Large-scale agricultural developments are a threat to a number of Ethiopia’s remaining elephant populations, particularly around Omo and Gambella National Parks in the west of the country. 

African Parks Network was responsible for the management of Omo NP (2005-2007) and has provided support to the management of Gambella NP since 2014. 

The Ethiopian Elephant Action Plan (EEAP) was drafted in 2015, but remains under review. 

In recent analyses of seizure data in ETIS, prepared for CITES, Ethiopia has been identified as a country with a worrying involvement in illegal ivory trade (CITES Secretariat, 2012; Milliken et al., 2013, 2016). Ethiopia was requested by the CITES Standing Committee, at its 65th meeting, to prepare a National Ivory Action Plan. Ethiopia’s plan was submitted in January 2015 (CITES, n.d.-a). In March 2015, Ethiopia destroyed 6.1 tons of ivory from its national stockpile (BBC News, 2015b). Ivory trafficking through Bole Airport remains a concern, since it is an important hub for air traffic from the rest of Africa to the Middle and Far East. 

While elephant trophy hunting remains legal in Ethiopia, no quotas were declared to the CITES Secretariat between 2007 and 2015.

## Numbers and Distribution

The estimated number of elephants in areas surveyed in the last ten years in Ethiopia is 1,017 at the time of the last survey for each area. There may be an additional 1,160 elephants in areas not systematically surveyed. This guess probably represents a minimum number, and actual numbers could be higher than those reported. Together, this estimate and guess apply to 18,598 km², which is 84% of the estimated known and possible elephant range. There remains an additional 16% of the estimated range for which no elephant population estimates are available.

There has been an increased estimate of about 700 elephants since the AESR 2007, largely because of the increase in numbers observed in Gambella NP.  Previously there had been much uncertainty about the status of the elephant population of Gambella NP, in the far west of the country, and it was not known whether elephants were resident, or only visiting from the Boma area of South Sudan. A reconnaissance survey in 2009 found six elephants, and only four were seen in 2010 (TFCI, 2010). However, during an aerial total count in 2013, 337 elephants were seen (Grossmann et al., 2013). In 2015, 550 elephants were observed in the south-west of the park in an aerial total count, and another 56 were seen during the course of an **aerial sample count** of the wider ecosystem (Mònico & Schapira, 2015). This replaces a guess of 200 from 2002 (Ethiopia Wildlife Conservation Organization, 2002). Radio-collared elephants moved in a single large herd along the southern edge of the park close to the South Sudanese border and south-east to the Akobo CHA (Rolkier et al., 2015); using this information a new area of **known range** has been added to the range map, and the amount of **possible range** reduced. A point record to the north of Gambella has been added for a sighting during the 2015 survey. 

While Mizan Teferi Controlled Hunting Area was previously considered to be the main area for elephants in the south-western forests, more recent reports suggest that Chebera Churchura National Park, which was gazetted in 2014, holds the largest remaining population. Ground counts from 2012-14 in Chebera Churchura indicated that there were 420 elephants (Ali, pers. comm., 2016). No details were given so this is treated as an **informed guess**, which replaces the previous informed guess of 60 from 2001 (Chago et al., 2001). The AESR 2007 included an old guess of 500 elephants for Mizan Teferi, which has been replaced by a new **informed guess** of 20 (Ali, pers. comm., 2016).

The elephant population in the Omo Valley is believed to move between Omo and Mago National Parks and the intervening Tama Controlled Hunting Area, and possibly into South Sudan. This population is under pressure from the development of sugar plantations in Tama (Chase et al., 2014a). During a **sample aerial count** in 2014, no elephants were observed on transect but 411 elephants were seen in Omo NP and 32 in Mago NP (Chase et al., 2014a). However, it is thought that there are more elephants in Mago NP and an estimate of 80 has been used (Ali, pers. comm., 2016). The previous guess for both Omo and Mago was 324-524 elephants in 2002 (Demeke, pers. comm., 2006). 

There have been occasional reports of elephants in the Geralle National Park to the south of the country. It is not known whether this is a resident population, or if it moves between Ethiopia and Kenya. Local residents reported about 50 elephants in this area in 2015 (Ali, pers. comm., 2016). There was no estimate in the AESR 2007. An area of **possible range** has been added.

A helicopter-based aerial survey in 2014, carried out as part of the Great Elephant Census, only located 36 elephants in the Babille Elephant Sanctuary (Chase et al., 2014a), but elephant are difficult to count from the air when they are in thick riverine vegetation. A ground count, also in 2014, estimated 250 elephants, which has been treated as an **informed guess** (Ali, pers. comm., 2016). The previous informed guess was 264 in 2005 (Demeke, pers. comm., 2006). 

A ground survey in 2014 of the Kafta-Sheraro National Park (previously Shire Wildlife Reserve) in the north of Ethiopia (a transfrontier population shared with Eritrea) indicated that it contains about 300 elephants (Ali, pers. comm., 2016). This **informed guess** replaces an old total count estimate of 12 for the neighboring Shire and Tekezze Valley areas (Litoroh, 1997b). 

It is estimated that there are 20 elephants in the Alitash National Park (Ali, pers. comm., 2016). This is likely to be a transfrontier population with Dinder National Park in Sudan. There was no estimate for this population in the AESR 2007. An area of **possible range** has been added. 

There is an **informed guess** of 20 elephants close to the Sudanese border in the Dabus Valley Controlled Hunting Area on the Blue Nile (Ali, pers. comm., 2016). This replaces a guess of 200 from 1998 (Abdi, pers. comm., 1998).