## Current Issues

Mozambique has been severely affected by the recent upsurge in elephant poaching. This has been particularly striking in the country’s largest population in the Niassa ecosystem (WCS, 2015b). 

The Wildlife Conservation Society (WCS) co-manages Niassa National Reserve with the National Administration of Conservation Areas (ANAC) (WCS, 2015b). Considerable effort has gone into the rehabilitation of Gorongosa National Park, under joint venture arrangements with a private sector partner and foreign investor (Wilson, 2013).

In 2014 a new Biodiversity Law, which criminalises poaching, imposes deterrent sentences, and allows asset seizure, was signed into law (WCS, 2015b). 

A five year strategy and action plan for the conservation and management of elephants in Mozambique was developed in 2010 (National Directorate of Conservation Areas, 2010).

Sport hunting of elephants is permitted in Mozambique. From 2007 to 2010, Mozambique’s declared annual export quota increased from 80 (tusks as hunting trophies from 40 animals) to 200 (tusks as hunting trophies from 100 animals). The annual export quota of 200 remained from 2010 to 2015 (CITES, n.d.-b). 

In recent analyses of seizure data in ETIS, prepared for CITES, Mozambique has been identified as a country with a worrying involvement in illegal ivory trade (CITES Secretariat, 2012; Milliken et al., 2013, 2016). Mozambique was requested by the CITES Standing Committee, at its 65th meeting, to prepare a National Ivory Action Plan. Mozambique’s plan was submitted in January 2015 (CITES, n.d.-a). In July 2015, Mozambique destroyed 2.4 tonnes of ivory from its national stockpile (Vaughan, 2015).

## Numbers and Distribution

The estimated number of elephants in areas surveyed in the last ten years in Mozambique is 10,884 ± 2,228 at the time of the last survey for each area. There may be an additional 4,299 to 5,519 elephants in areas not systematically surveyed. These guesses likely represent a minimum number, and actual numbers could be higher than those reported. Together, this estimate and guess apply to 261,669 km², which is 82% of the estimated known and possible elephant range. There remains an additional 18% of the estimated range for which no elephant population estimates are available.

A country-wide aerial survey was carried out in 2008 (Agreco, 2008) and while it was undertaken at a low sampling intensity and did not cover all areas, it provided an important baseline. The country’s most important population is in the far north, in and around the Niassa NR. Smaller populations occur in the west and centre of the country in Tete and Sofala Provinces and in the south in Gaza Province. The range map has been substantially altered using the information from the 2008 survey. Because surveys have been conducted using a variety of different techniques, it is not easy to compare the national estimates with those from the AESR 2007. The number of elephants estimated from systematic surveys in Mozambique has declined by about 4,000. However, this includes elephants in some areas that had not been previously surveyed, and there has actually been a decrease of about 9,000 in populations which have been surveyed using comparable techniques. There has also been a decline of about 3,000 in the guessed number of elephants. 

An **aerial sample count** was conducted in the Niassa Ecosystem in 2014 as part of the Great Elephant Census, giving an estimate of 4,441 ± 1,360 (Grossman et al., 2014d), which replaces an estimate of 12,477 ± 2,111 from 2004 (Craig & Gibson, 2004). In 2009 and 2011 aerial sample count estimates of 20,118 ± 2,701 and 12,029 ± 2,531 were obtained (Craig, 2011a, 2009). There appears to have been a substantial population decline, which is supported by a carcass ratio of 42% in 2014. The 2009 result may have been an over-estimate (Booth & Dunham, 2014) or the result of elephants having moved into the area due to disturbance elsewhere (Craig, 2009).

The 2008 national elephant census (Agreco, 2008) indicated that there were elephants just to the south of Niassa. An additional 1,015 ± 591 elephants were counted in an extension zone on the southern boundary of Niassa in 2014 (Grossman et al., 2014d). In 2011 an **aerial sample count** gave an estimate of 333 ± 309 in the Chipanje Chetu area to the west of the Niassa Reserve, which was not counted in 2014 (Craig, 2012a). 

The Quirimbas National Park to the south-east of Niassa was surveyed in 2011, in 2013 (Craig, 2012b, 2013) and in 2014 as part of the Great Elephant Census (Grossman et al., 2014c) giving estimates of 555 ± 448, 560 ± 460 and 328 ± 361 elephants respectively. The 2014 estimate replaces a guess of 2,000 from 2005 (Cumming & Jones, 2005). Estimates in a corridor linking Quirimbas NP to Niassa NR were 294 ± 231 and 306 ± 365 elephants respectively in 2013 and 2014 (Craig, 2013; Grossman et al., 2014c).  The estimate for the Palma area of the Quirimbas ecosystem was 58 ± 83 (Craig, 2012b). The confidence limits associated with all these elephant estimates are too wide to draw any conclusions about changes in numbers. However the carcass ratios were very high at 15% in 2011, 49% in 2013 and 45% in 2014, indicating an unsustainable offtake. 

A ground survey of Gilé National Reserve was carried out in 2011-12 (Ntumi et al., 2012) which gave an **informed guess** of 21-166 elephants. This replaces a guess of 15-33 from 2002 (Ntumi, pers. comm., 2003). 

Gorongosa National Park lost most of its large mammals during the civil conflict of 1977-1992. There were believed to be 2,000 elephants before the war compared to about 200 in 1994 (Cumming et al., 1994). An **aerial total count** in 2014 covering 50% of Gorongosa NP estimated at least 535 elephants (Stalmans et al., 2014), replacing an estimate of 22 from 2004 (Dunham, 2004), which suggests that numbers may be increasing (WCS, 2015). 

A series of total counts, carried out in Marromeu Game Reserve since the mid-1960s (Bento et al., 2010), had been previously overlooked and thus no estimate was provided in the AESR 2007. In 2014, an **aerial sample count** was carried out as part of the Great Elephant Census, a few weeks after a helicopter count. The aerial sample count gave an estimate of 606 ± 634, which serves as the estimate for Marromeu GR, compared to 350 from the helicopter count (Grossman et al., 2014a). 

An **aerial sample count**, which was part of the Great Elephant Census, estimated the elephant population in the Magoe area south of Lake Cahora Bassa in 2014 at 1,051 ± 721 and that of southern Tete Province further east at 604 ± 431 (Grossman et al., 2014b). These estimates replace an estimate of 1,628 ± 794 from 2003 (Dunham, 2004) and a guess of 2,260 to 3,910 from 1998 (Direcção Nacional de Florestas e Fauna Bravia, 1999)  respectively. The 2014 survey had a high carcass ratio of 15%. Another aerial sample count in 2010 gave an estimate of 1,985 ± 1,102 (Dunham, 2010), suggesting that there had been no significant change between 2010 and 2014. No elephants were observed in the area north-west of Lake Cahora Bassa in 2014, compared to 90 in 2003 (Dunham, 2004). Note that the AESR 2007 incorrectly recorded an estimate of 1,718 elephants in this area. The 2014 survey did not cover the area between Lake Cahora Bassa and the Zambian border to the north, but there is recent evidence for the continued survival of elephants here (Jacobson, pers. comm., 2015) and the map shows the revised range based on this information.

An **aerial sample count** of Limpopo National Park and a southern extension along the South African border was carried out in 2014 as part of the Great Elephant Census (Grossmann et al., 2014e). This survey covered the entire national park and gave an estimate of 1,081 ± 641 elephants, which replaces an estimate of 630 (Whyte & Swanepoel, 2006) from a survey that covered only a section of the park. A further 173 ± 259 were estimated in the southern extension in 2014. There was a high carcass ratio of 17%. Fixed wing surveys were carried out in 2010 and 2013 but the results were considered unreliable (Grossmann et al., 2014e). A 2010 helicopter survey (Swanepoel, 2010) gave a minimum count of 1,007 elephants. 

There are new records of elephants from the area north-east of the Limpopo Transfrontier Conservation Area, which includes Banhine National Park. In the AESR 2007, Banhine NP was shown as non-range with an estimate of zero. Five elephants were seen in an **aerial total count** of Banhine NP in 2012 (Stalmans, pers. comm., 2012) and further evidence of the survival of elephants in this area was collected during the course of predator surveys (Andresen, pers. comm., 2015), so the area of **known range** has been modified accordingly. The numbers are likely to be low, however, as the 2014 Great Elephant Census survey of Gonarezhou in Zimbabwe covered the adjoining Massangena West area in Mozambique and no elephants were seen there (Dunham & van der Westhuizen, 2015).

Helicopter based counts were carried out in the Maputo Special Reserve in 2004, 2006, 2008, 2011 and 2012. During this period the maximum number counted was 348 in 2008 (Matthews, 2008) with a minimum of 80 in 2004. Although Bodasing and Cumbane (2013) counted 264 elephants in 2012, the authors considered that there were at least 400 elephants in the population (Bodasing & Cumbane, 2013). This count also included the Futi Corridor extension to Tembe Elephant Park in South Africa. The 2008 figure has been used in the report, since it is considered to be closer to the true number. 

Some areas surveyed in 2008 have not been surveyed more recently, and a figure for the rest of Mozambique of 4,278 has been extracted from this dataset (Agreco, 2008). However, because of the uncertain overlaps in time and space with the other surveys this has been treated as an **informed guess**.