## Current issues

Southern Africa continues to hold by far the largest number of elephants on the continent, and nearly 75% of southern Africa’s elephants occur as part of a single population in the Kavango Zambezi Transfrontier Conservation Area (KAZA TFCA), some 520,000 km² in extent. Whereas conservation challenges associated with high elephant densities in large protected areas were common in the region a decade ago, contemporary elephant conservation in southern Africa is now also faced with the emergence of a growing poaching threat (UNEP et al., 2013). While overall, poaching has not had the same impact in Southern Africa as in other regions, it has severely affected populations in Zimbabwe, Angola, Mozambique, and to a lesser extent, Zambia. 

As human population growth has often not been matched by regional economic growth, many unemployed people either remain at or have returned to their rural homes from urban areas (Taylor, 2009). These communally owned unprotected areas have previously provided up to 60% or more of elephant range (Blanc et al., 2007; Cumming & Jones, 2005). However, habitat encroachment and transformation, together with ivory poaching, growing human-wildlife conflict and unsustainable bushmeat harvesting increasingly threaten the survival of elephant populations in these areas (Ripple et al., 2015). Poor governance could become potentially threatening for the long-term survival of elephants in southern Africa (CITES Secretariat, 2014). 

Under the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Fauna and Flora (CITES), there are ten sites in Southern Africa for Monitoring the Illegal Killing of Elephants (MIKE). Elephant carcass data from these sites can be used to calculate the Proportion of Illegally Killed Elephants (PIKE). For Southern Africa between 2007 and 2015 the PIKE values show an increasing trend, with a spike of 0.5 in 2011. PIKE levels above 0.5 (i.e. where half of dead elephants found are deemed to have been illegally killed) are considered to be unsustainable and Southern Africa is the only region whose overall PIKE values have not risen above 0.5 since 2003 (Figure 1) (CITES Secretariat, 2016). 

In response to the challenge of increased poaching of elephants, rhinos and other wildlife, in 2015 the Southern African Development Community (SADC) ministers responsible for environment and natural resources approved the SADC Law Enforcement and Anti-Poaching Strategy 2016-2021 (SADC, 2015). The 2005 Southern Africa Regional Elephant Conservation and Management Strategy (SADC, 2007) is in need of revision.

In recent analyses of seizure data from the Elephant Trade Information System (ETIS), prepared for CITES, a number of countries in Southern Africa have been identified as having a worrying involvement in illegal ivory trade (CITES, 2012; Milliken et al., 2013, 2016). Angola and Mozambique have been requested to prepare and implement National Ivory Action Plans. 

Whereas all populations of the African elephant have been listed in CITES Appendix I since 1989, those of Botswana, Namibia and Zimbabwe were transferred to Appendix II in 1997 and South Africa’s was transferred in 2000. In 2008, these four elephant range states conducted a one-off legal sale of 101,766 kg of raw ivory to approved trading partners in China and Japan (CITES, 2009; Wijnstekers, 2011) (Table 1) . 

## Numbers and Distribution

The estimated number of elephants in areas surveyed in the last ten years in Southern Africa is 293,447 ± 16,682 at the time of the last survey for each area. There may be an additional 15,157 to 16,672 elephants in areas not systematically surveyed. These guesses likely represent a minimum number, and actual numbers could be higher than those reported. Together, this estimate and guess apply to 734,824 km², which is 55% of the estimated known and possible elephant range. There remains an additional 45% of range for which no elephant population estimates are available.

Between the AESR 2007 and this report, elephant numbers in Southern Africa have declined by almost 30,000, on the basis of updated estimates for sites where comparable survey techniques were employed. However, some populations have been surveyed for the first time and this has led to an increase of approximately 3,000 in the ‘new population’ category.  The result is that the current total number of elephants from surveyed populations represents a smaller estimated reduction of about 27,000 elephants. Although there have been real declines in Mozambique and Zimbabwe, the main contributor to this decline is a reduction in the estimate for Botswana, which is more likely to be a result of methodological differences between surveys than of a real change in numbers. 

Southern Africa has a relatively high reliability and quantity of elephant information, especially for the larger populations. Although overall survey coverage has increased since 2007, largely as a result of the Great Elephant Census carried out in 2014-2015, there is still wide variation amongst countries. 

One population was recorded as having been lost from Angola. 

The proportion of elephant range for which elephant estimates are available currently stands at 55%, an increase from 53% in the previous report. The overall quality of information, as measured by the IQI, has increased from 0.48 to 0.50.

There is reliable information available for Botswana, Namibia, Swaziland, South Africa, Zambia and Zimbabwe. In Angola, only the south east region of the country has been surveyed, and one population in the Bongola area on the Angola-Namibia international border has been reported as lost (Vaz Pinto & Verissimo, pers. comm., 2014). Detailed nationwide surveys of elephant abundance and distribution are urgently needed in Angola. Surveys in Mozambique, although improved, have been spatially and temporarily variable and have used different techniques, apart from in the Niassa ecosystem in the north. Malawi with its high human population and small fragmented elephant population has relied mostly on total counts or informed guesses. 

Southeast Angolan and southwest  Zambian elephant populations continue to experience losses to poaching (Chase & Schlossberg, 2016; DNPW, 2016). Population trends from repeat surveys in northern Botswana remain equivocal. Mozambique’s elephant population has been reduced by an estimated 25%, mostly in the north due to severe poaching. 

In Namibia the elephant population has increased, notably in the north-east Kavango and Zambezi Regions. South Africa’s elephant population, mostly contained within Kruger National Park, is increasing, with small but growing numbers of elephants in other provincial and private reserves. Zambia’s elephant population appears to be relatively stable apart from losses in the south-west of the country which amount to approximately 2% of the overall population. Zimbabwe’s elephant population has declined due to reductions in two populations, partially compensated by increases in two other populations.

The current range area for Southern Africa is 1,325,998 km², a slight increase from the 1,305,000 km² recorded in the AESR 2007, and the percentage of this which is known range has increased from 53% to 60%. There has been no major loss of elephant range, and one notable expansion of range in Botswana where elephants were observed in large groups for the first time in the Central Kalahari Game Reserve (DWNP, 2016). Other changes result from improved information, particularly in Angola.