## Current Issues

West Africa’s elephant populations are mostly small, fragmented and isolated. With growing human populations and increasing infrastructure development, many countries in West Africa are experiencing increased pressure on natural areas from mining, logging and rapid transformation of land to agriculture. These challenges are particularly acute in those countries that have recently emerged from civil strife (GEF, 2010; Mallon et al., 2015). 

The AESR 2016 provides more information than previous status reports on countries known to have small, isolated and highly vulnerable populations, with some stark results. Although numbers are small relative to continental levels, West Africa reported losing twelve populations of elephants since the AESR 2007: one each in Cote d’Ivoire, Ghana, Guinea Bissau, Sierra Leone and Togo; two in Guinea and five in Nigeria. It is surprising, however, that there is recent evidence for the continued survival of a number of populations that were already at a very low level 10-20 years ago. 

The transboundary “WAP” complex (“W” National Park, Arly National Park and Pendjari National) straddles the border between Benin, Burkina Faso, Niger, continues to hold the region’s largest population which has great significance as one of West Africa’s few populations with potential long-term viability. 

West Africa has 18 MIKE sites. While reporting rates vary, three sites (Comoé National Park in Côte d’Ivoire, Babban Rafi Forest in Niger, and Kéran NP in Togo) have not reported any elephant carcasses since MIKE started in 2002 and about half the remaining 15 sites did not report any carcasses in 2015. While small populations, such as those prevalent in West Africa, cannot be expected to yield large numbers of carcasses, there have been apparent examples of under-reporting (CITES Secretariat, 2016). Figure 1 (on the following page) provides the most recent PIKE figures for West Africa. The low level of reporting of data for West African MIKE sites in 2015 is cause for concern, in terms of both the regularity of reporting and data quality, which makes reliable inferences on trends impossible for the region. 

The Strategy for the Conservation of West African Elephants (African Elephant Specialist Group, 2005b) is now outdated as is the series of national level plans that followed its development. The third wave of planning is currently underway using the framework provided by the African Elephant Action Plan (AEAP) which was adopted by CITES in 2010 (African elephant range states, 2010). Niger was the first country to produce a national plan under the AEAP in 2010 (Direction de la Faune, de la Chasse et des Aires Protégées, 2010), and Liberia is scheduled to initiate their process in 2016 as part of the Elephant Protection Initiative.  

In recent analyses of seizure data prepared for CITES, a number of countries in West Africa have been identified as having a worrying involvement in illegal ivory trade (CITES Secretariat, 2012; Milliken et al., 2013, 2016). Nigeria has been requested to prepare and implement a National Ivory Action Plan. Further details are provided in the country summaries. 

## Numbers and Distribution

The estimated number of elephants in areas surveyed within the last ten years in West Africa is 11,489 ± 2,583 at the time of the last survey for each area. There may be an additional 2,886 to 3,376 elephants in areas not systematically surveyed. These guesses likely represent a minimum number, and actual numbers could be higher than those reported. Together, this estimate and guess apply to 102,850 km², which is 72% of the estimated known and possible elephant range. There remains an additional 28% of the estimated range for which no population estimates are available.

The overall number of elephants in West Africa appears to have increased since 2006. The 2015 survey of the WAP complex supported by the Great Elephant Census (Bouché et al., 2015), produced an estimate of 8,953 ± 2,486 compared to 4,592 for the “WAPOK” complex in 2003 (WAPOK is the WAP complex plus parts of Togo) (Bouché et al., 2004b). The latest data for Togo’s portion of this population indicates that its contribution is negligible. The apparent growth in population, the region’s largest, is the major contributor to the overall increase in the region since the AESR 2007.

The proportion of elephant range for which elephant estimates are available currently stands at 72%, an increase from 66% in the previous report. The overall quality of information, as measured by the IQI, has increased from 0.44 to 0.48.

At the national level, population estimates for both Benin and Burkina Faso suggest increases in the WAP complex.  Estimates for Côte d’Ivoire, Ghana, Guinea Bissau, Senegal, Sierra Leone and Togo have stayed more or less constant with some higher and lower guesses, while estimates for Guinea, Mali and Nigeria have declined since 2006. Guinea is now reduced to a single small population. Niger’s few remaining elephants are thought to still move in and out of the country as part of the WAP complex. Information on Liberia’s elephants has been substantially improved in this report, adding a small number to guesses originating from 1989/90. Some of the previous numbers, primarily guesses, for Côte d’Ivoire, Ghana, and Nigeria remain unchanged in this report but have become degraded data due to age.

A substantial update of the West African elephant range has been completed for this report, and this has the effect of reducing the total range (known and possible) from 176,000 to 142,000 km², but the percentage of known range has increased from 71% to 79%. The 2015 Great Elephant Census survey of the WAP complex resulted in the addition of areas of known range in Benin and Burkina Faso but more areas were moved to possible and doubtful range. In Côte d’Ivoire, Ghana, Guinea, Guinea Bissau, Niger, Sierra Leone and Togo, many areas of previously known range have been changed to possible and doubtful range. Range loss has been particularly severe in Côte d’Ivoire. In Liberia, the area of known range has been increased with improved access to information following many years of war. In Mali, small areas of doubtful range have been removed, and sightings and data from collared elephants have provided information to refine the range of the Gourma elephants. In Nigeria, two small areas have been moved to known range, but far more has been changed to possible range and even doubtful range. 